---
title: 'Reading Tips'
date: 2024-10-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-4/
tags:
  - reading
  - book
  - tips
---

- **You don’t have to read from cover to back**
  - Feel free to skip the intro/foreword.
  - Feel free to stop reading sections that bore you, you could always come back.
  - Feel free to jump to sections that seem more interesting.

- **Make notes**
  - Doesn’t have to be long notes, can simply be question marks.
  - Highlight main points.
  - Allows you to track your progress over time, so the next time you read it, you might understand sections that you didn’t get before, which can serve as a reward mechanism.  
    *Example:* Tell my story of how looking over my notes on English learning while young, I realized that I’ve progressed so much.

- **Don’t feel insecure about what you’re reading**  
  It’s more habit/interest building at the beginning.  
  Even reading Sally Rooney can get you interested in communism.

- **Start with a question/problem**
  - A recent breakup can lead you to explore what evolutionary biology says about relationships.
  - A feeling of meaninglessness or despair can lead you to reading about philosophy (existentialism), psychology (logotherapy), history (have humans always wondered about the meaning of life, ex: in tribes).

- **Don’t fixate on memorizing everything**
  - I forget a lot of the things I read, but they’re internalized in your view on life and how you treat others around you, how you deal with problems.
  
  - **Chinese saying:** 竹篮打水一场空  
    Basically means that when you use a bamboo basket to carry water, you'll end up with nothing, but I think we can interpret this saying in a different way.  
    We didn't end up carrying water, but the bamboo basket would be washed and shined by the water. In some ways, water has become one with the bamboo basket if you keep using it to carry water. In this sense, our mind is like the bamboo basket and books the water.  
  
  - If you interpret this saying from another aspect, the bamboo stick basket didn’t get any water contained, but the bamboo sticks got washed by water and are forming a union with the water over time.

