---
title: 'How to Manage College - choosing schools, majors, or whether to continue to grad school?'
date: 2024-11-11
permalink: /posts/2024/11/blog-post-3/
tags:
  - college
  - choice
  - major
---

I've dabbled in quite a few fields and I'm interested in a wide range of topics. So maybe I can provide some useful insights on what to study in college or those few years after high school in general. 

1. Remember that you don't have to decide on everything you want to do with your life at 18 years old yet. You can always take some time to travel or volunteer in another country to explore more about yourself and the world. I definitely didn't have much clue about myself and the world at 18 and it's OKAY. 
2. You can always change your major once you're in college. That's the good thing about doing an undergrad in US. It's not so lenient in China or Europe I hear. Students in Chinese colleges have nearly no chance of switching your major unless you have very strong connections with the school board or the government. From my research of grad schools in Europe, they usually require you to have a degree in the same major in undergrad for you to qualify to apply for grad school in that field. So switching from one major in undergrad to another in grad school is also nearly impossible. But education in Europe is mostly free. Europeans don't have to fret about college tuition and be fine taking a few more years to finish or a few more tries at school selection. 

Here is my story:
I was very interested in outer space and extraterrestrial life in high school so I entered into college thinking I'd enjoy aerospace engineering. Now looking back, I think I'm more interetsed in astronomy than engineering. During a summer exchange program at Dublin, Ireland, I realized that I am not as passionate about designing spacecraft or rockets or planes as my fellow classmates. I happened to really enjoy a World Literature class and an Architecture and Society class I took to meet my degree requirment. (Sidenote:classes in college are definitely very different from classes in high school, especially for the huamnities. Humanities college professors are just so much more charismatic, knowledgeable and passionate about their field. If I'd explored more into other departments, I might actually end up somwhere else, who knows) 

I looked more into the architecture degree in the US and realized most architecture undergraduate degrees requires 5 years of study and they usually get their architect's license right afterwards. For non architecture undergrad students who wish to transfer to architecture after they finish undergrad, they have the option of getting a 3-year MARCH 1 degree and then obtain their architect's license. Those who majored in architecture in undergrad can continue to obtain an MARCH 2 degree in grad school if they wish. I was very uptight at the time and didn't want to graduate one year late because I thought I'd feel 'old' somehow. This is totally an unnecessary, but hey, I was living in China before I was 16, so it makes sense that I fret about taking even one wrong step in life. Only now I find that there are no wrong steps in life, it's just life and every step is constructive once you finish it. So don't feel anxious, just do what you think is the best at the time and don't regret it or beat yourself up later for not making the supposedly better choice.

So, anxious and tight as I was, I didn't wanna take more than 4 years to finish undergrad, I decided to switch to civil engineering, thinking that it wouldn't be so different from architecture. This whole time I really didn't have anyone to look out for me because neither my parents nor my grandparents ever went to college. My dad grew up in rural China in the deep moutains, and my mom had a bit city life but she didn't go to college either. I looked up youtube videos that supposedly explained the difference, but it's all very abstract to me at the time. Only after I graduated that I realized that I actually have to work on construction sites, and I kinda hated it. But then I feel like most undergrad classes are only introductory courses and they don't really go deep into a field, so it's all for you to explore and know the basics of a small branch within that field to see if you like it. For example, within civil engineering, we have subfields like ocean engineering, traffic engineering, structural engineering, infrastructure, water systems, air pollution etc. Usually students have to take an intro class for a handful of subfields to meet their degree requirement. 

Another thing that I wish I did right was internships. I wasn't really in a hurry to find an internship thinking that there'd be more time. But undergrad is actually the perfect timing for you to be getting internships and discovering what kind of job you enjoy doing or what kind of job you're good at. I spent all my summer and winter holidays vacationing and didn't find any internships. Then COVID hit in 2020 and no one seemed to be doing internships until I graduated in 2021, or at least I thought so. Definitely seize those summmer and winter holidays to either do research at school or doing internships in the industry. It's way easier to get a return offer from the company you interned at than just cold emailing and then get in straight away. 

Now let's continue with my story, I finished undergrad in May 2021 and really didn't feel like working in civil engineering. However, I did really enjoy fluid dynamics and the computer science classes I took. I also happened to do a semester project on computational fluid dynamics so I decided to switch to Computer Science, in hopes that maybe this is my field. It's quite difficult to swtich to Computer Science in grad school with a Civil Engineering undergrad so I decided to apply for an interdisciplinary field called Computational Science and Engineering. This way I can take mostly Computer Science classes and still get into some schools. I ended up getting into the Engineering Mechanics (with a computaitonal track) at Columbia, the Computer Science program for non CS undergrad program at USC, CSE program at Brown, and CSE program at Gatech. I heard so many good words on gatech on 1point3acres, which is a forum facing Chinese international students studying in the US. I ended up going to Gatech thinking that I'd have a great time there, only to end up really struggling in grad school. So now, here is my other advice: DO YOUR SCHOOL RESEARCH MORE THOROUGHLY

Don't just ask one person. Seek out people's opinions on differnt platforms, connect and chat with alums on linkedin even, to ask how did they find attending that school. You'd be surprised at what you hear. Finding the right school is really important because different schools have different vibes. I used to think that I'm very tech and nerdy and only came to realize that I'm actually very outgoing and playful at Gatech. Friends can be difficult when you just don't fit in the vibe at a school. Even though I still made some great friends and made some great connections at gatech, I'd still say that Atlanta has a very different vibe from Austin (where I attended undergrad). 

Now I'm applying for PhDs and I've found a few programs that I really like and some professors doing extremely exciting work. However, PhD is more a hit or miss compared to undergrad or masters because each PhD advisor can only sponsor a certain number of students. If their current students don't graduate and leave open spots, you barely have any chance of getting in. So it's really more about fit and timing. Don't fret about PhD way to early though, you'd figure it out naturally!

The last thing I want to say is that trust the process. We're all in the making and no one has figured it out yet. It's okay to feel anxious, to worry, to be scared. We're all humans and these are human feelings. We've all got this! As a first-gen college student, first-gen master student, and now potentially first-gen PhD, I know this is not easy, especially without a mentor, so feel free to email me your questions or concerns, I'll do my best to help! We're all here for each other ❤️




